Java Core Concepts 
The Big Picture
You write code (.java file)
        ↓
Compiler (javac) converts it
        ↓
Bytecode is created (.class file)
        ↓
JVM runs the bytecode
        ↓
Output
1. Source Code
Code you write yourself, in human-readable Java syntax
Saved with a .java extension (e.g. Hello.java)
Computers cannot understand this directly — computers only understand machine code (0s and 1s)
2. Compiler (javac)
Takes your .java file and converts it into Bytecode
Command: javac Hello.java
Produces a new file: Hello.class

When exactly is Hello.class created?

Just writing and saving Hello.java does NOT create Hello.class
Hello.class is created only when you actually run the compiler command (javac Hello.java)
After that, the folder has both files:
  Hello.java   → your original code
  Hello.class  → bytecode, created by the compiler

Analogy: Writing Hello.java is like writing a letter in Hindi and leaving it on a table. The English translation (Hello.class) doesn't exist until you actually take it to a translator (run javac).

Note on VS Code: Clicking the "Run" button automatically runs javac in the background for you — you don't type it manually, but the same process (compile → then run) still happens internally.

3. Bytecode
An intermediate form — not human-readable like source code, but also not raw machine code
Made of JVM-specific instructions
Platform-independent — the same .class file can run on Windows, Mac, or Linux, as long as a JVM is installed there
This is why Java's slogan is: "Write Once, Run Anywhere" (WORA)
Why doesn't the compiler just create machine code directly?

How C/C++ works (for comparison):

C code → Compiler → Machine Code (specific to one OS, e.g. Windows)

Problem: code compiled for Windows only runs on Windows. To run on Mac, you'd have to recompile separately for Mac.

Why Java is different: Java's goal was "write code once, run it everywhere — without recompiling for each OS." So Java uses a 2-step process:

Step 1: Java code → Compiler → Bytecode (universal, not tied to one OS)
Step 2: Bytecode → JVM → Machine code (specific to whichever OS the JVM runs on)

The compiler runs only once, producing a single bytecode file. That same file can then run on any OS that has a JVM.

Analogy: You create one international document (bytecode) in a universal format. In France, a French translator (JVM) converts it to French. In Germany, a German translator (JVM) converts the same document to German. The original document never changes — only the local translator differs.

4. JVM (Java Virtual Machine)
A "virtual computer" — a software program that behaves like a computer inside your real computer, purely to run Java bytecode
Takes bytecode and converts it into the real machine code specific to that computer/OS, then executes it
Acts as a translator: bytecode (universal) → machine code (specific to your computer)
Every OS has its own JVM (Windows JVM, Mac JVM, Linux JVM — each built differently internally), but the bytecode itself never changes — this is what makes Java portable

Why is the JVM described as "for the computer to understand"? Bytecode isn't directly usable by any specific computer's processor — it's a universal middle language. The JVM's job is to take that universal bytecode and turn it into the machine code that the specific computer it's running on can actually execute.

Example: You create Hello.class on a Windows laptop. You copy the file to a friend's Mac. If a Mac JVM is installed there, running java Hello works immediately — no recompiling needed. The file (.class) never changed; only the local JVM handled the translation differently.

5. JRE (Java Runtime Environment)
JRE = JVM + Core Libraries
Includes the JVM + core Java classes (like System, String, etc. — built-in code you use but didn't write yourself)
Only needed if you just want to run an already-compiled Java program — not write or compile one

Why libraries are needed: When your code uses System.out.println(...) or String, you didn't write those yourself — they already exist as pre-built classes inside the JRE. The JVM looks them up from there when running your program.

When is JRE enough? If someone gives you an already-compiled .class file and you just want to run it (java Hello), JRE alone is enough — no compiler needed.

6. JDK (Java Development Kit)
JDK = JRE + Compiler (javac) + Development Tools
Needed if you want to write and compile your own Java code
Includes everything in JRE, plus the compiler and other dev tools (like a debugger)
What you want to do	What you need
Just run an already-built Java program	JRE (JVM + libraries)
Write and compile your own Java code	JDK (JRE + compiler + tools)

          
JDK is the biggest — it contains JRE, and JRE contains JVM.

Full Process Example

Step 1 — Compile:

bash
javac Hello.java

Produces: Hello.class (bytecode)

Step 2 — Run:

bash
java Hello

JVM reads Hello.class, converts it to machine code for your specific computer, and runs it.

Output:

Hello World
Quick Reference Table
Term	What it is
Source Code	Your .java file (human-readable)
Compiler (javac)	Converts source code into bytecode
Bytecode	.class file — platform-independent intermediate code
JVM	Runs bytecode by converting it into machine code
JRE	JVM + libraries — needed only to run programs
JDK	JRE + compiler + tools — needed to write/compile programs


Other basic rules:

Java is case-sensitive — String and string are different

Comments (ignored by the compiler, just notes for humans):



java
  // single-line comment
  /* multi-line
     comment */